README.md, before:

# RL Differential Drive Navigation with LiDAR and EKF

## 1. Project Overview

This project investigates reinforcement learning (RL) methods for autonomous navigation of a differential-drive ground robot operating in a stochastic and partially observable environment. 

The robot is equipped with:
- Wheel encoders for odometry
- A 2D LiDAR sensor for obstacle detection

To simulate realistic robotics conditions:
- Wheel slip is introduced as stochastic process noise
- LiDAR measurements are corrupted with Gaussian noise
- An Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is used for state estimation

The objective is to learn a navigation policy that safely reaches a randomly generated goal while avoiding randomly generated circular obstacles.

---

## 2. Markov Decision Process (MDP) Formulation

The navigation task is modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP):

\[
\mathcal{M} = (S, A, P, R, \gamma)
\]

### 2.1 State Space \( S \)

The true robot state is:

\[
x_t = (x, y, \theta)
\]

However, due to sensor noise and wheel slip, the agent does not have direct access to the true state.

Instead, the agent observes an estimated belief state from the EKF:

- Estimated pose: \( (\hat{x}, \hat{y}, \hat{\theta}) \)
- LiDAR beam measurements
- Relative goal position in robot frame

Thus, the RL state is defined as:

\[
s_t = [\hat{x}, \hat{y}, \hat{\theta}, \text{LiDAR}, \text{Goal}_{relative}]
\]

---

### 2.2 Action Space \( A \)

For the simplified tabular subtask (Grid World):

- Up
- Down
- Left
- Right

For the full robot environment:

- Forward
- Turn Left
- Turn Right
- Stop

Later versions may use continuous actions \((v, \omega)\).

---

### 2.3 Transition Function \( P(s'|s,a) \)

State transitions are governed by differential-drive kinematics:

\[
d = \frac{\Delta s_r + \Delta s_l}{2}
\]

\[
\Delta \theta = \frac{\Delta s_r - \Delta s_l}{b}
\]

Wheel slip is modeled as stochastic process noise:

\[
\Delta s_l' = \Delta s_l + \epsilon_l
\]

\[
\Delta s_r' = \Delta s_r + \epsilon_r
\]

where:

\[
\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma^2)
\]

Thus, transitions are stochastic.

---

### 2.4 Reward Function \( R(s,a) \)

The reward function is defined as:

- +100 for reaching the goal
- -100 for collision
- -1 per time step (encourages shorter paths)
- Optional shaping reward based on distance reduction

This shaping encourages efficient and safe navigation.

---

### 2.5 Terminal States

Episodes terminate when:

- Goal is reached
- Collision occurs
- Maximum step limit is reached

---

## 3. Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)

The EKF estimates robot pose using:

### Prediction:
- Differential-drive motion model
- Wheel encoder inputs

### Correction:
- LiDAR-based geometric observations

The RL agent receives the EKF estimated pose rather than ground-truth state, making the environment partially observable.

---

## 4. Simplified Grid World Subtask (For Dynamic Programming)

Since the full navigation problem has a continuous state space, a simplified discrete Grid World environment is implemented to demonstrate tabular Dynamic Programming methods.

Grid World characteristics:

- Finite state space
- Deterministic transitions
- Obstacles
- Single goal state

This subtask allows implementation of:

- Policy Iteration
- Value Iteration
- Q-value improvements

---

## 5. Implemented Algorithms (Version 1)

### Dynamic Programming
- Policy Iteration
- Value Iteration

### Tabular Reinforcement Learning
- Monte Carlo Prediction
- TD(0)
- Q-learning
- Epsilon-Greedy exploration

Future versions will include:
- TD(n)
- TD(λ)
- Sarsa(n)
- Sarsa(λ)
- Function approximation
- Deep Q Networks (DQN)

---

## 6. Agent Framework

All agents inherit from a base class:

```python
class BaseAgent:
    def train(self, env):
        pass

    def evaluate(self, env):
        pass

    def select_action(self, state):
        pass

Commit message:

Enhance README with stochasticity and EKF details
Added section on stochasticity and model learning motivation, explaining the agent's learning process and future extensions toward model-based reinforcement learning. Updated EKF section to clarify prediction and correction steps while emphasizing the partial observability of the environment.

README.md, after:

# RL Differential Drive Navigation with LiDAR and EKF

## 1. Project Overview

This project investigates reinforcement learning (RL) methods for autonomous navigation of a differential-drive ground robot operating in a stochastic and partially observable environment. 

The robot is equipped with:
- Wheel encoders for odometry
- A 2D LiDAR sensor for obstacle detection

To simulate realistic robotics conditions:
- Wheel slip is introduced as stochastic process noise
- LiDAR measurements are corrupted with Gaussian noise
- An Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is used for state estimation

The objective is to learn a navigation policy that safely reaches a randomly generated goal while avoiding randomly generated circular obstacles.

---

## 2. Markov Decision Process (MDP) Formulation

The navigation task is modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP):

\[
\mathcal{M} = (S, A, P, R, \gamma)
\]

### 2.1 State Space \( S \)

The true robot state is:

\[
x_t = (x, y, \theta)
\]

However, due to sensor noise and wheel slip, the agent does not have direct access to the true state.

Instead, the agent observes an estimated belief state from the EKF:

- Estimated pose: \( (\hat{x}, \hat{y}, \hat{\theta}) \)
- LiDAR beam measurements
- Relative goal position in robot frame

Thus, the RL state is defined as:

\[
s_t = [\hat{x}, \hat{y}, \hat{\theta}, \text{LiDAR}, \text{Goal}_{relative}]
\]

---

### 2.2 Action Space \( A \)

For the simplified tabular subtask (Grid World):

- Up
- Down
- Left
- Right

For the full robot environment:

- Forward
- Turn Left
- Turn Right
- Stop

Later versions may use continuous actions \((v, \omega)\).

---

### 2.3 Transition Function \( P(s'|s,a) \)

State transitions are governed by differential-drive kinematics:

\[
d = \frac{\Delta s_r + \Delta s_l}{2}
\]

\[
\Delta \theta = \frac{\Delta s_r - \Delta s_l}{b}
\]

Wheel slip is modeled as stochastic process noise:

\[
\Delta s_l' = \Delta s_l + \epsilon_l
\]

\[
\Delta s_r' = \Delta s_r + \epsilon_r
\]

where:

\[
\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma^2)
\]

Thus, transitions are stochastic.

---

### 2.4 Reward Function \( R(s,a) \)

The reward function is defined as:

- +100 for reaching the goal
- -100 for collision
- -1 per time step (encourages shorter paths)
- Optional shaping reward based on distance reduction

This shaping encourages efficient and safe navigation.

---

### 2.5 Terminal States

Episodes terminate when:

- Goal is reached
- Collision occurs
- Maximum step limit is reached

---

### 2.6 Stochasticity and Model Learning Motivation

The transition dynamics are stochastic due to wheel slip in the motion model, and observations are corrupted by LiDAR measurement noise. Although the environment is fully implemented, the agent does not have direct access to the true transition probabilities or reward structure. Instead, it must learn these properties through interaction.

This formulation enables future extensions toward model-based reinforcement learning, where the agent may explicitly estimate or approximate the transition function \( P(s'|s,a) \) and reward function \( R(s,a) \) from experience.

## 3. Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)

Because the robot operates under motion and sensing uncertainty, state estimation is performed using an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF).

The EKF maintains a Gaussian belief over the robot pose:

\[
\hat{x}_t = (\hat{x}, \hat{y}, \hat{\theta})
\]

Prediction step:
- Uses nonlinear differential-drive kinematics
- Propagates covariance using Jacobians of the motion model
- Incorporates wheel slip as process noise

Correction step:
- Incorporates LiDAR-derived geometric measurements
- Updates pose estimate using measurement residuals and Kalman gain

The reinforcement learning agent receives the EKF-estimated pose rather than ground-truth state, making the task partially observable and more representative of real robotic systems.

---

## 4. Simplified Grid World Subtask (For Dynamic Programming)

Since the full navigation problem has a continuous state space, a simplified discrete Grid World environment is implemented to demonstrate tabular Dynamic Programming methods.

Grid World characteristics:

- Finite state space
- Deterministic transitions
- Obstacles
- Single goal state

This subtask allows implementation of:

- Policy Iteration
- Value Iteration
- Q-value improvements

---

## 5. Implemented Algorithms (Version 1)

### Dynamic Programming
- Policy Iteration
- Value Iteration

### Tabular Reinforcement Learning
- Monte Carlo Prediction
- TD(0)
- Q-learning
- Epsilon-Greedy exploration

Future versions will include:
- TD(n)
- TD(λ)
- Sarsa(n)
- Sarsa(λ)
- Function approximation
- Deep Q Networks (DQN)

---

## 6. Agent Framework

All agents inherit from a base class:

```python
class BaseAgent:
    def train(self, env):
        pass

    def evaluate(self, env):
        pass

    def select_action(self, state):
        pass
